Killer whales are one of the most widespread animals in the world, but even these cosmopolitan creatures can be mysterious in a vast ocean. However, a team of researchers has made progress in understanding the killer whale family tree by analyzing over 100,000 photographs of killer whales off the United States west coast. The researchers cataloged a group of killer whales off the Oregon and California coasts by assessing where each animal was seen and in whose company.

Josh McInnes, a master’s student at the University of British Columbia, who led the study, explains that killer whales are found all over the world, spending most of their time in coastal waters. However, the offshore oceanic waters inhabited by them are still not well understood. Outer coast killer whales are believed to be a subset of transient, or Bigg’s, killer whales, known for their highly coordinated hunting sorties. Scientists have observed that transient killer whales in the eastern Pacific are a mix of multiple pocket communities with unique cultures.

This assemblage of outer coast killer whales seems to spend much of their time traveling along the edge of the continental shelf between central California and Oregon, with some specifically targeting biodiverse canyon areas, such as California’s Monterey Canyon, to forage for larger pelagic prey. On the other hand, the more familiar coastal transient killer whales hunt for pinnipeds such as harbor seals and sea lions in nearshore waters off Washington, British Columbia, and southeast Alaska.

Aside from having distinct dietary preferences and habitats, outer coast and nearshore transient killer whales also appear to have different dialects. The calls of some outer coast killer whales are higher pitched than those of their better-known coast-hugging kin. Lawrence Dill, a behavioral ecologist at Simon Fraser University in British Columbia, emphasizes the importance of preserving the behavioral diversity within a species.

The researchers suspect that there may be yet another distinct community of killer whales, which they dubbed the oceanic killer whales, predominantly found hundreds of kilometers from land. The researchers also came across killer whales that turned up in even more remote locations, leading them to believe that they could be a completely unknown population.

Unraveling the relationships between groups of killer whales is challenging, with the moles traveling 100 kilometers in a single day. But with the help of observations taken by people who spend time far out at sea, including researchers, whale watchers, oceanographers, fishermen, and even birders, the picture is beginning to come into focus. The new catalog is the first chapter in a much larger story.